DATA_COLLECTION_GUIDE.md, before:

# Student Guide: Data Collection & Folder Organization

This guide outlines how to collect data and organize property folders for the Disaster Reconnaissance project. Following this structure is critical for the automated reporting tools to work.

## 1. Folder Structure
For each disaster event you analyze, create a root folder named after the event (e.g., `Mayfield_Tornado`, `Lahaina_Fire`).

**Required Structure:**
```text
[Disaster_Name]/
├── supplementary/        <-- General info about the whole town/area
├── individual/
│   └── [Property Address]/       <-- e.g., "123_Main_St"
│       ├── photos/
│       │   ├── before/           <-- "Before" images go here
│       │   └── after/            <-- "After" images go here
│       └── files/                <-- PDF reports, property cards, etc.
└── features.xlsx         <-- (Optional) Project-level configuration
└── archetypes.xlsx       <-- (Optional) Project-level configuration
```

## 2. What to Collect

### A. Individual Properties (`individual/[Address]/`)
#### Images (`photos/`)
-   **Before Images**: High-quality Google Street View screenshots or historic photos showing the building intact.
    -   *Goal*: Clear view of facade, roof shape, and window layout.
-   **After Images**: Post-disaster photos showing the damage.
    -   *Goal*: Show debris, collapse mechanism, and remaining structural elements.
-   **Timeline Images (`photos/timeline/`)**: Any other photos from years before or after the event.
    -   *Goal*: Track the existence of the building over time.
    -   *Naming*: **CRITICAL**: Start filename with the Year (e.g., `2018_satellite.jpg`, `2021-03_drone.png`).

#### Documents (`files/`)
-   **Property Cards**: PDF exports from county assessor sites.
-   **Technical Reports**: Existing damage assessment reports if available.

### B. General Area (`supplementary/`)
This folder is for context that applies to the entire dataset or town, not just one building.
-   **Maps**: PDF or Image exports from ArcGIS/FEMA showing the path of the tornado/fire or flood plains.
-   **News Reports**: Articles summarizing the overall impact, timeline of the event, and casualty statistics.
-   **Drone Overviews**: High-altitude shots covering multiple blocks (useful for understanding the "Urban Setting" attribute).
-   **Demographics**: Census data or summaries of the town's population and housing stock.

## 3. Data Sources

### A. Location & Context
-   **ArcGIS / FEMA Maps**: Use official disaster maps to locate damaged properties and determine EF-ratings (approximate).
    -   *Look for*: Overlays of tornado paths or flood zones.
-   **Google Earth Pro**: Use the "Historical Imagery" slider (clock icon) to find "Before" images if current ones are updated post-disaster.

### B. Property Details (The "Before")
-   **Zillow / Redfin / Realtor.com**: Search the address to find real estate photos. These often have high-res interior/exterior shots that Google Street View misses.
    -   *Tip*: Even if "Off Market," the listing history often retains photos.
-   **County Assessor (GIS)**: Search the county's GIS portal for "Property Cards." These list construction year, square footage, and materials.

### C. Damage Evidence (The "After")
-   **Social Media**: Twitter (X), Facebook, and TikTok are valuable for real-time disaster footage.
    -   *Search Terms*: "[City Name] tornado", "[Street Name] damage", "aerial footage [City]".
-   **YouTube / Facebook**: Look for drone flyovers of the disaster zone.
    -   *Recommended Channels*: **iCyclone** (Josh Morgerman), **WXChasing** ([Brandon Clement FB Reels](https://www.facebook.com/wxchasing/reels/)), **Reed Timmer**, **Live Storms Media**.
-   **NOAA / NWS Imagery**: The National Weather Service often releases high-resolution aerial comparison maps after major events.

### E. Location Data
-   **GPS Coordinates**: We now track exact location.
    -   *How to finds*: Right-click the building on Google Maps and click the numbers at the top (e.g., `36.741, -88.632`).
    -   *Where to put it*: You will enter this in the final Report table, or save it in a text file in the `files/` folder for reference.

-   **[National Register Database (NPS)](https://npgallery.nps.gov/nrhp)**: Search for historic nominations and technical descriptions.
-   **[USGS EarthExplorer](https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/)**: Download historic satellite imagery (Landsat/Sentinel).
-   **[Google Earth Pro](https://www.google.com/earth/versions/)**: Desktop version required for the "Historical Imagery" timeline slider.
-   **[NOAA Damage Assessment Toolkit](https://apps.dat.noaa.gov/stormdamage/)**: Official NWS damage paths and EF-ratings.
-   **[NOAA Emergency Response Imagery](https://storms.ngs.noaa.gov/)**: Ultra high-res post-disaster aerials (The "Gold Standard" for After images).
-   **[ReliefWeb](https://reliefweb.int/disasters)**: Global disaster monitoring, reports, and humanitarian context.
-   **[ArcGIS Damage Assessments](https://www.arcgis.com/home/user.html?user=v-lmarotti_mssmt)**: (Example Source) Useful user-generated maps and data.

1.  **Visual Verification**: Don't rely on just one source. If the assessor says "Brick" but the photo shows "Vinyl Siding," trust the photo (it might be a brick veneer or a renovation).
2.  **File Naming (Orientation)**: Do **NOT** guess "North" or "South" unless you are looking at a map.
    -   *Bad*: `north_wall_damage.jpg` (unless verified).
    -   *Good*: `front_facade_damage.jpg`, `rear_elevation.jpg`, `left_side_from_street.jpg`.

3.  **PDFs**: Only put relevant PDFs in the `files/` folder.

## 4. Feature Definitions & References
If you are unsure what a specific term means (e.g., "What counts as a Hip Roof?" or "How to measure Scour"), refer to these detailed guides:

-   **Tornado Features**: [Tornado Data Entry Guide](previousDataInputGuides/tornado/2025_4_9_dataEntryGuide.pdf)
-   **Flood Features**: [Flood Data Input Guide](previousDataInputGuides/flood/flood_data_input_guide_Carol.pdf)

*Note: These guides refer to the old Excel manual entry method, but the **definitions** of the building features (Architecture, Damage Patterns) remain the source of truth.*

Commit message:

add per-wall damage, flood duration, Observer Name, and strict naming rules

DATA_COLLECTION_GUIDE.md, after:

# Student Guide: Data Collection & Folder Organization

This guide outlines how to collect data and organize property folders for the Disaster Reconnaissance project. Following this structure is critical for the automated reporting tools to work.

## 1. Folder Structure
For each disaster event you analyze, create a root folder named after the event (e.g., `Mayfield_Tornado`, `Lahaina_Fire`).

**Required Structure:**
```text
[Disaster_Name]/
├── supplementary/        <-- General info about the whole town/area
├── individual/
│   └── [Property Address]/       <-- e.g., "123_Main_St"
│       ├── photos/
│       │   ├── before/           <-- "Before" images go here
│       │   └── after/            <-- "After" images go here
│       └── files/                <-- PDF reports, property cards, etc.
└── features.xlsx         <-- (Optional) Project-level configuration
└── archetypes.xlsx       <-- (Optional) Project-level configuration
```

## 2. What to Collect

### A. Individual Properties (`individual/[Address]/`)
#### Images (`photos/`)
-   **Before Images**: High-quality Google Street View screenshots or historic photos showing the building intact.
    -   *Goal*: Clear view of facade, roof shape, and window layout.
-   **After Images**: Post-disaster photos showing the damage.
    -   *Goal*: Show debris, collapse mechanism, and remaining structural elements.
-   **Timeline Images (`photos/timeline/`)**: Any other photos from years before or after the event.
    -   *Goal*: Track the existence of the building over time.
    -   *Naming*: **CRITICAL**: Start filename with the Year (e.g., `2018_satellite.jpg`, `2021-03_drone.png`).

#### Documents (`files/`)
-   **Property Cards**: PDF exports from county assessor sites.
-   **Technical Reports**: Existing damage assessment reports if available.

### B. General Area (`supplementary/`)
This folder is for context that applies to the entire dataset or town, not just one building.
-   **Maps**: PDF or Image exports from ArcGIS/FEMA showing the path of the tornado/fire or flood plains.
-   **News Reports**: Articles summarizing the overall impact, timeline of the event, and casualty statistics.
-   **Drone Overviews**: High-altitude shots covering multiple blocks (useful for understanding the "Urban Setting" attribute).
-   **Demographics**: Census data or summaries of the town's population and housing stock.

## 3. Data Sources

### A. Location & Context
-   **ArcGIS / FEMA Maps**: Use official disaster maps to locate damaged properties and determine EF-ratings (approximate).
    -   *Look for*: Overlays of tornado paths or flood zones.
-   **Google Earth Pro**: Use the "Historical Imagery" slider (clock icon) to find "Before" images if current ones are updated post-disaster.

### B. Property Details (The "Before")
-   **Zillow / Redfin / Realtor.com**: Search the address to find real estate photos. These often have high-res interior/exterior shots that Google Street View misses.
    -   *Tip*: Even if "Off Market," the listing history often retains photos.
-   **County Assessor (GIS)**: Search the county's GIS portal for "Property Cards." These list construction year, square footage, and materials.

### C. Damage Evidence (The "After")
-   **Social Media**: Twitter (X), Facebook, and TikTok are valuable for real-time disaster footage.
    -   *Search Terms*: "[City Name] tornado", "[Street Name] damage", "aerial footage [City]".
-   **YouTube / Facebook**: Look for drone flyovers of the disaster zone.
    -   *Recommended Channels*: **iCyclone** (Josh Morgerman), **WXChasing** ([Brandon Clement FB Reels](https://www.facebook.com/wxchasing/reels/)), **Reed Timmer**, **Live Storms Media**.
-   **NOAA / NWS Imagery**: The National Weather Service often releases high-resolution aerial comparison maps after major events.

### E. Location Data
-   **GPS Coordinates**: We now track exact location.
    -   *How to finds*: Right-click the building on Google Maps and click the numbers at the top (e.g., `36.741, -88.632`).
    -   *Where to put it*: You will enter this in the final Report table, or save it in a text file in the `files/` folder for reference.

-   **[National Register Database (NPS)](https://npgallery.nps.gov/nrhp)**: Search for historic nominations and technical descriptions.
-   **[USGS EarthExplorer](https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/)**: Download historic satellite imagery (Landsat/Sentinel).
-   **[Google Earth Pro](https://www.google.com/earth/versions/)**: Desktop version required for the "Historical Imagery" timeline slider.
-   **[NOAA Damage Assessment Toolkit](https://apps.dat.noaa.gov/stormdamage/)**: Official NWS damage paths and EF-ratings.
-   **[NOAA Emergency Response Imagery](https://storms.ngs.noaa.gov/)**: Ultra high-res post-disaster aerials (The "Gold Standard" for After images).
-   **[ReliefWeb](https://reliefweb.int/disasters)**: Global disaster monitoring, reports, and humanitarian context.
-   **[ArcGIS Damage Assessments](https://www.arcgis.com/home/user.html?user=v-lmarotti_mssmt)**: (Example Source) Useful user-generated maps and data.

1.  **Visual Verification**: Don't rely on just one source. If the assessor says "Brick" but the photo shows "Vinyl Siding," trust the photo (it might be a brick veneer or a renovation).
278.  **File Naming (Orientation - STRICT)**: You MUST use these prefixes so the Agent knows which wall is which.
    -   `front_...`
    -   `rear_...`
    -   `left_...`
    -   `right_...`
    -   *Example*: `front_facade.jpg`, `right_side_wall_collapse.png`

3.  **PDFs**: Only put relevant PDFs in the `files/` folder.

## 4. Feature Definitions & References
If you are unsure what a specific term means (e.g., "What counts as a Hip Roof?" or "How to measure Scour"), refer to these detailed guides:

-   **Tornado Features**: [Tornado Data Entry Guide](previousDataInputGuides/tornado/2025_4_9_dataEntryGuide.pdf)
-   **Flood Features**: [Flood Data Input Guide](previousDataInputGuides/flood/flood_data_input_guide_Carol.pdf)

*Note: These guides refer to the old Excel manual entry method, but the **definitions** of the building features (Architecture, Damage Patterns) remain the source of truth.*
